---
title : 'TDA on Phoyllotaxis'
# date : 2024-01-14T21:36:42-05:00
draft : false
summary: "Apply Topological Data Analysis on the study of Phyllotaxis plant patterns in Prof. Christophe Golé's lab"
description: "Apply Topological Data Analysis on the study of Phyllotaxis plant patterns in Prof. Christophe Golé's lab"
tags: ["plant","Topological Data Analysis","visual","research","interdisciplinary"]
cover:
  image: /img/projects/phyllotaxis/hexagons.png
  alt: Heatmap from TDA results
  hidden: false
author: ["Summer 2023 - now"]
hideMeta: false
weight: 35
---
## Overview
This project is the part that I was mostly involved in as a research assistant in Prof. Christophe Golé's Phyllotaxis Plant lab. Phyllotaxis is the arrangement of plant organs on a stem, and we are studying the Fibonacci ones from the Quasi Symmtery ones, the latter being more irregular. By applying topological data analysis on phyllotaxis, we can measure and quantify the irregularity of both kinds.




---
## Brief Abstract
Phyllotaxis is the arrangement of plant organs on a stem. Frequently, these organs are arranged into spirals; the numbers of spirals in each direction are often two consecutive Fibonacci numbers. However, some plants display similar numbers of spirals in each direction. Stephane Douady coined the term “quasi-symmetric” to describe this. The goal of our research is to statistically distinguish quasi-symmetric from Fibonacci phyllotaxis, and determine which conditions prompt the formation of each. Throughout, we use the geometric tool of primordia fronts, which gives a local count of spirals.

During SURF, I worked on a Python program that simulates phyllotactic pattern growth, built by previous students and was based on programs generated by Professor Christophe Golé. The program generates disks to a cylinder's surface without overlap, providing numerical and visual simulations of how the system stabilizes into periodic rhombic tiling structures. 

Annie Karitonze, Evelyn Gao, and I first transcripted and updated a topological data analysis (TDA) program created by Professor Robin Belton from Jupyter Notebook to Python. TDA allows us to quantify the irregularity of the pattern in one simulation. Then, Evelyn and I applied a different version of the TDA analysis. The old TDA takes disks out from the cylinder to generate a regular pattern as a comparison, while the new TDA generates a regular pattern from the last fronts that are rhombic tiling structures as a comparison. Moreover, we added Delaunay Triangulation as the third analysis measurement, which focuses on the geometric relationship between the disks. We combined these 3 measurements using Principal component analysis and produced a Mapper Graph as a high-level understanding of the data. Lastly, we generated graphs like barplot, swarmplot, and stripplot to compare the regularity of Fibonnaci pattern and Quasi Symmetry pattern. 

Besides these new additions to the program, we also debugged disk generation in the original code, improved the data generation algorithm for more accurate visualization, and updated the overall flow of the program.
